GIT & HEPATOBILIARY-II 
MODULE 
4th Year MBBS 
1 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
2 
 Table of Contents 
 
Khyber Medical University (KMU) Vision: ............................................................................................. 3 
Khyber Medical University (KMU) Mission: ............................................................................................ 3 
Institute of Health Professions Education & Research (IHPER) Mission: ......................................................... 3 
Introduction to Module ..................................................................................................................... 4 
Teaching Hours Allocation ................................................................................................................. 5 
General Learning Objectives .............................................................................................................. 6 
Specific Learning Objectives .............................................................................................................. 7 
Learning Resources ....................................................................................................................... 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Khyber Medical University (KMU) Vision: 
Khyber Medical University will be the global leader in health sciences academics and 
research for efficient and compassionate health care. 
Khyber Medical University (KMU) Mission: 
Khyber Medical University aims to promote professional competence through 
learning and innovation for providing comprehensive quality health care to the nation. 
Institute of Health Professions Education & Research (IHPER) Mission: 
To produce leaders, innovators and researchers in health professions education who 
can apply global knowledge to resolve local issues. 
3 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
Introduction to Module 
Gastro-intestinal-II and Hepatobiliary-II Module is designed to provide both basic, clinical knowledge and skills to the 
medical students. The modules include sessions on important pathological diseases of gastrointestinal system and 
hepatobiliary system. The relevant clinical subjects are also taught under the shared themes with pharmacological 
explanation. The medical and surgical management and preventive aspect of the diseases is also addressed.  
Table 1: Themes 
S. No 
Themes 
1 
Difficulty in swallowing 
Duration Weeks 
1 
2 
Pain epigastrium 
1 
3 
Pain right upper abdomen 
2 
4 
Diarrhea and constipation 
3 
5 
Bleeding Per Rectum 
1 
4 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
Teaching Hours Allocation 
Table 2: Total hours distribution of each subject 
S. No 
Subject 
Hours 
1 
Pathology 
2 
Pharmacology 
49 
20 
3 
Forensic medicine 
22 
4 
Community medicine 
23 
5 
Medicine 
13 
6 
Surgery 
14 
7 
Pediatrics 
4 
8 
Family medicine 
3 
9 
Anatomy 
10 
1 
PRIME 
11 
1 
Research*  
Total hours  
16** 
153 
* two hours per week for research project in the whole academic session 
**the marks of research activities are neither included in the final document nor in written assessment and as there are special marks allocated 
for it in viva. 
5 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
General Learning Objectives 
By the end of GIT-II Module, 4th year MBBS students will be able to: 
1. Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, morphology, clinical features, laboratory diagnosis, medical 
and surgical management of diseases of GIT & hepatobiliary system.  
2. Interpret the liver function tests in different hepatic diseases.  
3. Describe the basic and clinical pharmacology of drugs used in GIT & hepatobiliary diseases. 
4. Write prescriptions for common GIT & hepatobiliary disorders. 
5. Describe medico legal aspects of abdominal trauma. 
6. Describe medico legal aspects of vegetable acid, corrosive and irritants poisoning. 
7. Describe the epidemiology and prevention of malnutrition and viral hepatitis. 
8. Analyze demographic processes in context of public health care. 
6 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
Specific Learning Objectives 
Table 3: Theme wise learning objectives 
Theme-1 (Difficulty in swallowing) 
Subject 
Topic  
Hours  
S. No 
Learning objective  
At the end of year 4, the students of MBBS will be able to: 
Pathology  
Salivary 
(Inflammation 
Gland 
1 
1 
and 
tumors) 
Esophagus  
Classify the inflammatory and neoplastic diseases of salivary 
gland.    
2 
2 
3 
Describe the etiology, morphology, and clinical presentation of 
inflammatory and neoplastic diseases of salivary gland.    
Classify esophagitis.          
4 
Describe the etiology, pathophysiology, morphology, clinical 
presentation, and complications of esophagitis 
5 Classify esophageal tumors.   
Medicine  
Oral Cavity Diseases  
6 
1 
7 
Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, morphology, clinical 
presentation, diagnosis, and complications of esophageal 
tumors 
Discuss the etiology of stomatitis and Aphthous ulcers 
8 Discuss the clinical features of stomatitis and Aphthous ulcers 
Esophagus: 
9 Discuss the investigations of stomatitis and Aphthous ulcers 
1 
10 Devise a management plan for stomatitis and Aphthous ulcers 
11 
Discuss the causes of esophageal motility disorders  
12 
Discuss the clinical features of esophageal motility disorders 
7 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
8 
1) Esophageal motility 
disorders 
13 Discuss the relevant investigations of esophageal motility 
disorders 
14 Devise a management plan of esophageal motility disorders 
2) Esophagitis 1 15 Discuss the etiology of esophagitis 
16 Discuss the clinical features of esophagitis 
17 Discuss the appropriate diagnostic testing for esophagitis 
18 Devise a management plan for esophagitis 
3) Cardia achalasia 1 19 Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations, and 
management of Cardia achalasia 
4) Gastro Esophageal 
reflux disease 
(GERD) 
20 Discuss the risk factors, etiology, clinical features, 
investigations, complications, and management of GERD 
ENT  Cleft lip and palate 1 21 Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
complications and management of cleft lip and palate 
Pharyngitis and 
Tonsillitis  
1 
 
22 Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
complications and management of Pharyngitis and acute 
Tonsillitis 
23 Explain the clinical features, and management of peritonsillar 
abscess 
24 Discuss the classification, etiology, clinical features, 
investigations, and management of Chronic Tonsillitis 
Oropharyngeal cancer 1 25 Discuss the classification, etiology, clinical features, 
investigations, and management of oropharyngeal cancers 
Salivary glands  1 26 Classify diseases of the salivary glands 
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
9 
 27 Explain the etiology, clinical features, investigations, and 
management of Mumps, and Sialadenitis 
28 Explain the etiology, clinical features, investigations, and 
management of salivary ducts stones 
Dysphagia  1 29 Explain the types, etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
and management of a patient with dysphagia 
Surgery  Tumors of the 
esophagus  
1 30 Discuss the classification, etiology, clinical features, 
investigations, staging and management of Esophageal cancers 
Para-esophageal hiatus 
hernia 
31 Explain the etiology, clinical features, investigations, and 
management of Para-esophageal hiatus hernia 
PRIME/MEDICAL 
EDUCATION 
Social accountability 1 32 Explain the concept of social accountability 
33 Differentiate between different social accountability issues 
Theme-2 (Epigastric pain) 
 
Pathology  Gastritis  1 34 Explain the types, etiology, microscopic morphology, and 
clinical features of Gastritis 
Peptic ulcers 2 35 Discuss the etiology, pathophysiology, morphology, 
complications, and lab. diagnosis of peptic ulcer disease 
36 Discuss the role of H.Pylori & campylobacter in the causation 
of Peptic ulcer disease 
37 Discuss the morphology, virulence factors and lab diagnosis of 
H. Pylori & campylobacter 
Gastric polyps and 
tumors 
1 38 Classify gastric polyps and tumors 
39 
Describe the pathogenesis, morphology, lab diagnosis and 
complications of gastric polyps and tumors. 
Medicine 
Gastritis 
1 
40 
Explain the types, etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
management, and complications of Gastritis 
Peptic ulcer disease 
2 
41 
Explain the types, etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
management, and complications of Gastritis 
Upper GI Bleeding   
42 
1 
43 
Describe H.pylori eradication therapy protocols in the 
treatment of peptic ulcer disease 
Explain the etiology, clinical features, investigations, and 
management of a patient with upper GI bleeding 
Pharmacology  
Anti-emetics 
44 
2 
45 
Describe the indications and procedures of pharmacological 
and endoscopic treatment of variceal bleeding 
Classify anti-emetic drugs  
46 
Describe the mechanism of serotonin antagonists as anti
emetic agents. 
47 
Enlist the clinical uses (anti-emetic) and adverse effects of 
serotonin antagonists. 
48 
Describe the pharmacological basis of serotonin antagonists in 
chemotherapy induced vomiting 
49 
Describe the mechanism of H1-antagonists as anti-emetic 
agents. 
50 
Enlist the clinical uses (anti-emetic) of H1-antagonists. 
10 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
51 
Describe the mechanism of anticholinergic drugs as anti
emetic agents. 
52 Enlist the clinical uses (anti-emetic) of anticholinergic drugs. 
53 
Describe the pharmacological basis of scopolamine in motion 
sickness 
54 
Describe the anti-emetic mechanism of D2-receptor blockers 
(Metoclopramide & Domperidone). 
55 
Enlist the clinical uses (anti-emetic) and adverse effects of D2
receptor blockers. 
56 
Compare the pharmacological features of metoclopramide & 
Domperidone. 
57 
Describe the drug interaction of metoclopramide with 
levodopa. 
58 Describe the mechanism of neuroleptics as anti-emetic agent. 
59 Enumerate the clinical uses (anti-emetic) of neuroleptic drugs. 
60 Describe the antiemetic mechanism of benzodiazepines. 
61 Describe the antiemetic mechanism of glucocorticoids. 
62 Enumerate the indications (anti-emetic) of glucocorticoids. 
63 List anti-emetic drugs used in morning sickness. 
64 List anti-emetic drugs used in chemotherapy induced vomiting. 
66 
Drugs used in the 
treatment of variceal 
bleeding 
65 
Enlist the drugs used in variceal hemorrhage 
Describe the mechanism of somatostatin and octreotide in 
variceal hemorrhage 
11 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
67 
Describe the mechanism of Vasopressin & Terlipressin in 
variceal hemorrhage 
68 
Describe the mechanism of beta-blockers in variceal 
hemorrhage  
70 
Drugs used in the 
treatment of Peptic 
ulcer 
disease 
Gastritis 
and 
2 
69 
Classify the drugs used in Peptic ulcer disease 
Describe the mechanism of action, indications, and adverse 
effects of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). 
71 
Describe the pharmacokinetics of PPIs with special emphasis 
on time of administration 
72 
Describe the drug interaction of Omeprazole & H2 blockers 
with Sucralfate 
73 Describe the drug interaction of Omeprazole with Clopidogrel  
74 
Describe the mechanism of action, indications, and adverse 
effects of H-2 blockers. 
75 
Compare/differentiate H2-blockers in terms of bioavailability 
and involvement in drug interactions 
76 
Describe the mechanism of action, indications, and adverse 
effects of Antacids. 
77 Enumerate the properties of an ideal antacid. 
78 
Describe the pharmacokinetics of antacids with special 
emphasis on time of administration 
79 
Describe the drug interactions of antacids with tetracyclines, 
iron and fluroquinolones. 
12 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
80 
Forensic 
medicine 
Common 
poisons 
house-hold 
Describe the mechanism of sucralfate in the treatment of 
peptic ulcer 
81 List the indications of sucralfate. 
82 
Discuss the drug interaction of sucralfate with digoxin, 
ketoconazole and tetracyclines. 
83 
Describe the pharmacokinetics of sucralfate with special 
emphasis on time of administration. 
84 
Describe the mechanism, indications, and adverse effects of 
bismuth compounds. 
85 Describe the role of anticholinergic drugs in peptic ulcer. 
86 List the indications (anti-peptic ulcer) of anticholinergic drugs. 
87 
Discuss the pharmacological basis for the use of prostaglandin 
analogues (Misoprostol) in the treatment of peptic ulcer. 
88 List the contraindications of misoprostol.    
89 
Describe triple therapy for the eradication of H.pylori 
infection. 
90 
1 
91 
Describe quadruple therapy for the eradication of H.pylori 
infection 
Enlist, domestic, medicinal, and garden poisons commonly 
used 
Corrosives/ 
acids 
Mineral 
92 
Enlist different commonly used mineral acids 
93 Enumerate physical appearance and uses of Sulphuric acid  
94 
Describe mechanism of action, fatal dose & period of Sulphuric 
acid 
13 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
95 
Describe clinical features and treatment of Sulphuric acid 
burns  
Corrosives/ Alkali 
96 
Describe postmortem appearance and forensic importance of 
Sulphuric acid burns  
97 Enumerate physical appearance and uses of nitric acid  
98 
Describe mechanism of action and fatal dose & period of nitric 
acid 
99 
Describe clinical features and postmortem appearance of nitric 
acid burns  
100 Enumerate physical appearance and uses of hydrochloric acid  
101 
1 
102 
Describe clinical features and postmortem appearance of 
hydrochloric acid burns. 
Enlist different commonly used alkali. 
103 Enumerate physical appearance and uses of alkali 
104 
Describe mechanism of action, clinical features, and treatment 
of alkali burns. 
105 
1 
106 
Describe postmortem appearance and forensic importance of 
alkali burns. 
Enlist different commonly used organic acids. 
107 Enumerate physical appearance and uses of carbolic acid.  
Corrosive/ organic acid  
108 
Describe mechanism of action, fatal dose & period of carbolic 
acid. 
109 
Describe clinical features and treatment of carbolic acid 
poisoning.  
14 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
15 
110 Describe postmortem appearance and forensic importance of 
carbolic acid poisoning.  
111 Enumerate physical appearance and uses of oxalic acid.  
112 Describe mechanism of action, fatal dose & period of oxalic 
acid. 
113 Describe clinical features and treatment of oxalic acid 
poisoning.  
114 Describe postmortem appearance and forensic importance of 
oxalic acid poisoning. 
 Corrosive/ vegetable 
acid and cyanides 
1 115 Enumerate physical appearance, sources, and uses of cyanides.  
116 Describe mechanism of action, fatal dose & period of cyanides. 
117 Describe clinical features and treatment of cyanide poisoning.  
118 Describe postmortem appearance and forensic importance of 
cyanide acid poisoning. 
Surgery  Gastric cancer  1 119 Describe the types, etiology, risk factors, lab diagnosis and 
management of a patient with gastric cancer. 
Gastric outlet 
obstruction 
1 120 Describe the etiology, diagnosis, and management of a patient 
with gastric outlet obstruction. 
Community 
medicine and 
public health 
Health system of 
Pakistan: 
Introduction  
2 121 Describe health care system of Pakistan using WHO Health 
system framework. 
Primary health care 
(PHC) 
122 Define PHC. 
123 Describe the history of development of PHC. 
124 Describe the concepts and components of PHC. 
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
16 
125 Describe comprehensive & selective PHC. 
126 Describe reasons for failure of PHC. 
127 Describe Health Systems before & after PHC. 
128 Describe district health care system. 
129 Enumerate indicators for assessing PHC. 
Health education 3 130 Define health education. 
131 Describe objectives and functions of health education. 
132 Describe the components of health education. 
133 Describe the methods of health education. 
134 Describe the communication channel in health education. 
135 Describe the constraints in health education. 
136 Describe classification of theories of health education 
137 Describe the stages in health education 
138 Describe the principles of health education 
139 Describe the strategies for an effective health education 
program 
140 Explain the methods of evaluation and effectiveness of a 
health education project 
Health management 
information system 
(HMIS) 
 141 Define concept of HMIS 
142 Enumerate the components of HMIS 
143 Describe its importance in health care delivery system 
144 Enumerate the principles of HMIS 
145 Give the causes of failure of HMIS 
Hospital administration  1 
146 
Define health care delivery system 
147 Describe the need of a specialized hospital administration 
Health 
plans - 
148 Describe the attributes of a good hospital administrator 
149 Describe functions involved in hospital administration 
150 
1 
151 
Describe the levels of hospitals and management levels in a 
hospital 
Describe different health plans 
152 
Longitudinal, 
horizontal, integrated, 
5 year, ADP, SAP, Short 
term, long term 
Health plans - MDGs 
Describe characteristics of health plans 
1 
153 
Enumerate MDGS 
154 Describe targets & indicators of various health related MDGs 
Health plans – SDGs 
1 
155 Describe reasons for failure to achieve MDGS 
156 
Enumerate SDGs related to health 
157 Describe targets & indicators of various health related SDGs 
Health planning 
1 
158 Describe Pakistan progress on set targets 
159 
Define health planning 
160 Describe importance & use of planning in health 
Health economics 
161 Explain the reasons for ineffective health planning in Pakistan 
162 Describe health planning cycle 
1 
163 Describe the types of health planning 
164 
Define Health economics 
17 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
18 
165 Explain the importance of economic studies in health 
166 Describe different tools used in economic evaluations 
Health policy  1 167 Define health policy 
168 Describe its role in health system 
169 Describe different stages in policy making 
170 Describe the different types of policies 
171 Describe the constraints in policy making 
172 Describe health policy of Pakistan 
Role of international 
health agencies in 
public health 
1 173 Enumerate international health agencies working in health 
sector 
174 Discuss structure and function of WHO & UNICEF 
175 Explain the roles of WHO & UNICEF in Pakistan 
Theme-3 (Pain right upper abdomen) 
 
Anatomy  Gross anatomy 1 176 Explain the lobes and segments of the liver 
177 Discuss the gross structure of gall bladder and biliary channels 
178 Explain the gross and microscopic structure of the pancreas 
Liver histology  179 Explain the microscopic structure of the liver and gall bladder 
Pathology Liver Function Tests 1  180 Enumerate the functions of the liver. 
Explain the significance of different liver function tests. 
Interpret the Liver function tests in different diseases. 
Mechanisms of liver 
injury and repair  
1 181 Describe the etiology and morphology of liver injury and repair 
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
19 
Acute Liver failure 182 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical and biochemical 
and other features of acute liver failure 
Chronic Liver disease 
and liver cirrhosis 
1 183 Describe the etiology,  
pathogenesis, clinical and biochemical and other features of 
chronic liver disease 
184 Explain the complications of liver cirrhosis 
Portal hypertension 185 Describe the etiology,  
pathogenesis, clinical features and complication of portal 
hypertension 
Viral hepatitis A and E 1 186 Explain the Etiology, pathogenesis, morphology and clinical 
features of Acute viral hepatitis A and E infection 
Viral hepatitis B 2 187 Explain the Etiology, risk factors, pathogenesis, morphology 
and clinical features of Acute viral hepatitis B infection 
188 Explain the pathogenesis, morphology and clinical features of 
Chronic viral hepatitis B infection 
189 Discuss the stages of viral hepatitis B infections 
190 Discuss the complications of chronic Hepatitis B virus infection 
191 Discuss the serological markers of hepatitis B Virus infection 
192 Explain the preventive strategies of Hepatitis B virus infection 
Viral Hepatitis C  1 193 Explain the Etiology, risk factors, pathogenesis, morphology 
and clinical features of viral hepatitis C infection 
194 Discuss the complications of chronic Hepatitis C virus infection 
Autoimmune hepatitis  1 195 Define autoimmune hepatitis 
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
20 
 196 Explain the serological and morphological features of 
autoimmune hepatitis 
Toxin and Drug induced 
hepatitis 
197 Explain the etiology and morphological features of toxins and 
drug induced hepatitis 
Alcoholic liver disease 1 198 Discuss the morphology, pathogenesis and complications of 
Alcoholic liver disease 
Metabolic liver 
diseases 
• Non-Alcoholic liver 
disease (NAFLD) 
• Hemochromatosis 
• Wilson`s disease 
• Alpha-1 antitrypsin 
deficiency 
1 199 Describe the morphology, clinical features and complications 
of NAFLD, Hemochromatosis, Wilson`s disease and Alpha-1 
Anti-Trypsin deficiency 
200 Describe the etiology, morphology, clinical features and 
complications of Hemochromatosis 
201 Describe the etiology, morphology, clinical features and 
complications of Wilson`s disease 
202 Describe the etiology, morphology, clinical features and 
complication of Alpha-1 Anti-Trypsin deficiency  
Liver abscess 1 203 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, morphology, clinical 
presentation, complications and lab diagnosis of Liver abscess 
Tumors of the liver 1 204 Classify liver tumors 
205 Explain the benign tumors of the liver 
206 Discuss the risk factors, etiology, morphology, clinical 
features, staging and complications of hepatocellular 
carcinoma 
Gall bladder 
• Gall stones  
1 207 Discuss the types, risk factors, etiology, morphology, clinical 
features and complications of gall stones 
• Cholecystitis  
208 
Discuss the risk factors, etiology, morphology, clinical features 
and complications of acute cholecystitis 
• Gall bladder 
cancer 
Pancreas  
209 
1 
210 
Discuss the risk factors, etiology, morphology, clinical features 
and complications of Chronic cholecystitis 
Discuss the risk factors, etiology, morphology, clinical 
features, staging and complications of carcinoma gall bladder 
2 
211 
Enlist and define the congenital anomalies of pancreas 
212 
Discuss the risk factors, etiology, morphology, clinical features 
and complications of acute pancreatitis 
Pediatrics  
Hereditary 
hyperbilirubinemias 
213 
Discuss the risk factors, etiology, morphology, clinical features 
and complications of chronic pancreatitis 
214 
Describe the pathogenesis and complications of pancreatic 
pseudocyst 
215 
1 
216 
Discuss the risk factors, etiology, morphology, clinical 
features, staging and complications of carcinoma of pancreas 
Classify hereditary hyperbilirubinemias 
217 
Explain the types, clinical features, investigations, and 
management of different hereditary hyperbilirubinemias 
Acute hepatitis A 
1 
218 
Explain the Etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, 
investigations, and treatment of Acute viral hepatitis A 
infection 
Medicine  
Hepatitis 
infection 
B 
virus 
1 
219 
Explain the Etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, 
investigations, and treatment of Acute viral hepatitis B 
infection 
21 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
22 
 220 Explain the Etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, 
investigations, and treatment of chronic viral hepatitis B 
infection 
Hepatitis C virus 
infection 
1 221 Explain the Etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, 
investigations, and treatment of chronic viral hepatitis C 
infection 
222 Explain the clinical features, investigations, management, and 
complications of liver cirrhosis 
223 Explain the treatment of a patient with hepatic 
encephalopathy 
Metabolic liver 
diseases 
1 224 Discuss the management of a patient with Wilson`s disease 
225 Discuss the management of a patient with Hemochromatosis 
226 Discuss the management of a patient with primary biliary 
cirrhosis 
227 Discuss the management of a patient with autoimmune 
hepatitis 
Hepatic vein 
obstruction 
228 Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations and 
management of a patient with hepatic vein obstruction 
Hepatocellular 
carcinoma 
1 229 Explain the etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
treatment and complications of hepatocellular carcinoma 
Carcinoma of the 
pancreas 
230 Discuss the risk factors, etiology, clinical features, staging and 
complications of carcinoma of pancreas 
Surgery  Gall bladder and 
pancreas 
2 231 Explain the etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
treatment and complications of gall stones  
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
23 
 232 Explain the etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
treatment and complications of acute and chronic cholecystitis 
 233 Explain the etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
treatment and complications of acute and chronic pancreatitis 
Carcinoma of the gall 
bladder 
234 Discuss the risk factors, etiology, clinical features, staging and 
complications of carcinoma of gall bladder 
Liver abscess 1 235 Explain the etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
treatment, and complications of liver abscesses 
Hydatid liver cysts 236 Explain the etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
treatment, and complications of Hydatid liver cysts 
Pharmacology  Hepatotoxic drugs  1 237 Describe first pass hepatic metabolism 
238 Enlist common hepatotoxic drugs 
239 Explain the drug treatment of paracetamol poisoning  
Drugs used in the 
treatment of hepatitis 
B 
1 240 Classify the drugs for hepatitis B virus infection 
241 Describe the duration and adverse effects of drugs used in the 
treatment of chronic hepatitis B 
Drugs used in the 
treatment of hepatitis 
C 
1 242 Classify the drugs for hepatitis C virus infection 
243 Describe the duration and adverse effects of drugs used in the 
treatment of chronic hepatitis C 
Community 
medicine 
Viral Hepatitis  1 244 Describe the epidemiological determinants of Hepatitis B & C 
245 Describe the prevalence and incidence with reference to local 
context 
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
24 
246 Describe the preventive & control measures for Hepatitis B & 
C 
Family Medicine Acute and chronic 
hepatitis 
1 247 Explain the etiology and clinical features of acute hepatitis 
248 Explain the management strategies of acute hepatitis in family 
practice 
249 Explain the aetiology, clinical features, and complications of 
Chronic hepatitis 
250 Explain the management strategies of chronic hepatitis in 
family practice 
251 Describe the red flags in a patient with acute and chronic 
hepatitis for referral to specialty care 
Theme-4: (Diarrhea and Constipation) 
Pathology  Intestinal obstruction 1 252 Define hernia, adhesions, volvulus, and intussusception 
Ischemic bowel disease 253 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, morphology, and 
complications of small bowel ischemia 
Diarrheas  1 254 Define malabsorption syndrome 
255 Classify diarrheas 
256 Explain the etiology, morphology, clinical features and 
complications of Celiac disease 
Bacterial enterocolitis 2 257 Explain the etiology, pathogenesis, and clinical features of 
bacterial enterocolitis 
258 Explain the etiology, pathogenesis, morphology and clinical 
features of Salmonellosis 
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
25 
Parasitic enterocolitis 1 259 Classify the parasites invading the small gut 
Entamoeba histolytica 1 260 Discuss the life cycle, morphology, pathogenesis, clinical 
features, and complications of Amebiasis 
Giardia lamblia 1 261 Discuss the life cycle, morphology, pathogenesis, clinical 
features, and complications of Giardiasis 
Hymenolepis nana 4 262 Discuss the life cycle, morphology, pathogenesis, clinical 
features, and complications of H. nana infestation 
Diphyllobothrium 
latum  
263 Discuss the life cycle, morphology, pathogenesis, clinical 
features, and complications of Diphyllobothrium latum 
Schistosoma  
hematobium, mansoni 
and japonicum 
264 Enlist physical characteristics of Trematodes. 
 
265 Classify Schistosoma based on organ systems affected 
266 Describe the routes of infection, pathophysiology life cycle, 
clinical features, and lab diagnosis of Schistosoma 
hematobium, mansoni and japoncum. 
267 Compare the morphological characteristics of eggs of different 
species of Schistosoma.   
Ascaris lumbricoides 4 268 Discuss the life cycle, morphology, pathogenesis, clinical 
features, and complications of Ascaris lumbricoides 
Strongyloides  269 Discuss the life cycle, morphology, pathogenesis, clinical 
features, and complications of Strongyloides 
Ankylostoma 
duodenale 
270 Discuss the life cycle, morphology, pathogenesis, clinical 
features, and complications of Ankylostoma duodenale 
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
26 
 Enterobius vermicularis 271 Discuss the life cycle, morphology, pathogenesis, clinical 
features, and complications of Enterobius vermicularis 
Medicine  Intestinal tuberculosis 1 272 Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, 
investigations, treatment, and complications of intestinal 
tuberculosis 
Surgery  Acute appendicitis  1 273 Discuss the etiology, risk factors, pathogenesis, clinical 
features, differential diagnosis, investigations, treatment, and 
complications of acute appendicitis 
Intestinal obstruction 1 274 Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
management, and complications of intestinal obstruction 
Pharmacology  
  
Antidiarrheal agents 
(Opioids, Colloidal 
bismuth compounds, 
Kaolin & Pectin, etc 
1 275 Define and classify antidiarrheal agents 
276 Describe the mechanism of action of different antidiarrheal 
agents 
Laxatives (Bulk
forming, stool softners, 
osmotic laxatives, 
stimulant laxatives, 
etc. 
1 277 Define and classify laxative drugs 
278 Describe the mechanism of action of different laxatives 
Lactulose  279 Describe the pharmacological basis of Lactulose in the 
treatment of hepatic encephalopathy 
Anti-amoebic drugs  1 280 Classify anti-amoebic drugs 
281 Describe mechanism of actions of Metronidazole & Dialoxanide 
Furoate 
282 
Anthelmintics  
Enlist indications and adverse effect of Metronidazole & 
Dialoxanide Furoate. 
283 Describe the drug interaction of Metronidazole with Alcohol.   
1 
284 
Classify Anti-Helminthic drugs   
285 
Enumerate 
clinical 
use(s), 
adverse 
effects 
and 
contraindications of Albendazole, Mebendazole, Pyrantal 
Pamoate, Ivermectin, Praziquantel & Niclosamide  
Anti-Salmonellosis 
drugs 
286 
1 
287 
Describe mechanism of action of Albendazole, Mebendazole, 
Pyrantal Pamoate, Ivermectin, Praziquantel & Niclosamide 
List the drugs used in enteric fever. 
Forensic 
medicine 
Irritants  
288 
Describe the basis for selection of antibiotics in enteric fever 
based on age, pregnancy, and resistance 
289 
3 
290 
291 
Describe the clinical applications of fluroquinolones in the 
treatment of gastrointestinal disorders 
Classify irritants poisons 
Irritants: 
Metallic poisons  
Enlist common metallic irritant poisons 
292 
Describe physical appearance, uses, mechanism, fatal dose, 
fatal period and signs and symptoms of Copper and Mercury 
poisons  
293 
Describe the treatment, postmortem appearance and 
medicolegal importance of common Copper and Mercury 
poisons 
27 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
294 
Describe the signs and symptoms, treatment, postmortem 
appearance and medicolegal importance of acute and chronic 
Arsenic poisoning 
Irritants 
/mechanical 
poisons/ powder glass 
295 
1 
296 
Describe the signs and symptoms, treatment, postmortem 
appearance and medicolegal importance of acute and chronic 
Lead poisoning 
Enlist commonly encountered mechanical poisons 
297 
Enumerate symptoms and signs, treatment, postmortem 
appearance and forensic importance of powder glass 
Irritants/ nonmetallic 
poisons 
4 
298 
Enlist commonly encountered inorganic elements poisoning 
299 Enumerate physical appearance and uses of phosphorus  
300 
Describe mechanism of action, fatal dose & period of 
phosphorus 
301 
Describe clinical features and treatment of phosphorus 
poisoning  
302 
Describe postmortem appearance and forensic importance of 
phosphorus poisoning  
303 
Describe physical appearance, uses, mechanism of action, 
clinical features, treatment, postmortem appearance, and 
forensic importance of aluminum phosphide 
304 
Describe physical appearance, uses, mechanism of action, 
clinical features, treatment, postmortem appearance, and 
forensic importance of chlorine  
28 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
29 
 305 Describe physical appearance, uses, mechanism of action, 
clinical features, treatment, postmortem appearance, and 
forensic importance of iodine 
Irritants/ vegetable 
poisons 
2 306 Enlist commonly encountered inorganic elements poisoning. 
 
307 Describe characteristics, active principles, and clinical 
features of vegetable poisons 
308 Enumerate uses, fatal dose and fatal periods of vegetable 
poisons 
309 Describe treatment, postmortem appearance, and forensic 
importance of vegetable poisons   
Irritants/ animal 
poisons 
2 310 Differentiate between poisonous and non-poisonous snakes 
311 Classify snakes based on their venom. 
312 Describe the characteristics of snake venoms 
313 Classify different snakes’ venoms 
314 Describe steps of management of snake bite 
315 Describe postmortem appearance and medico legal aspects of 
venomous snake bite 
316 Describe sign and symptoms of scorpion bite 
Community 
medicine 
Overview of common 
intestinal worms’ 
infestation and their 
control 
1 317 Describe the common intestinal worm infestation in our local 
context 
318 Describe the epidemiological determinants of common worm 
infestation with reference to local context 
319 
Describe the preventive & control measures for common worm 
infestation 
Control of dysentery  
1 
320 
Describe the epidemiology of Dysentery. 
321 Describe the prevention & control measures of Dysentery 
Food hygiene  
1 
322 
Describe the term food Hygiene 
323 Describe the importance of food hygiene 
Family medicine Enteric infections 
1 
324 Describe the process of Food hygiene  
325 
Classify enteric infections 
326 
Describe the aetiology, clinical features, investigations, and 
management of Salmonellosis 
327 
Describe the red flags in a patient with Salmonella infections 
for referral to specialty care 
1 328 Explain the etiology, and management of acute gastroenteritis 
Pediatrics  
Lactase deficiency  
329 
Discuss the primary and secondary prevention of acute 
gastroenteritis in a primary healthcare setting 
330 
1 
331 
Describe the red flags in a patient with acute gastroenteritis 
for referral to specialty care 
Describe the clinical features, investigations, complications, 
and management of Lactase deficiency  
Infectious diarrhea 
332 
Describe the etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
complications, and management of infectious diarrheas in 
children 
Celiac disease  
1 
333 
Describe the etiology, clinical features, investigations, 
complications, and management of Celiac disease 
30 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
31 
Theme- 5 (Bleeding per Rectum) 
 
Pathology  
 
 
Inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD) 
2 334 Classify IBD 
335 Discuss the risk factors and etiology of IBDs 
336 Explain the pathogenesis clinical presentation of IBD 
337 Differentiate between Ulcerative colitis and Crohn`s disease 
338 Discuss the investigations and management of IBDs 
339 Explain the intestinal and extra-intestinal 
manifestations/complications of IBDs 
340 Explain the role of surveillance colonoscopy in patients with 
Ulcerative colitis 
Diverticular disease 1 341 Explain the etiology, pathogenesis, morphology, and clinical 
features of Colonic diverticulosis 
Colonic polyps 1 342 Classify colonic polyps.                                                                                                     
343 Describe the pathogenesis, morphology, clinical presentation, 
complications, and diagnosis of different types of colonic 
polyps 
Hemorrhoids  344 Define hemorrhoids 
345 Explain the morphology, pathogenesis, and clinical features of 
Hemorrhoids  
Colorectal carcinoma 1 346 Describe the adenoma carcinoma sequence                                                                                      
347 Describe the pathogenesis, morphology, clinical presentation, 
complications and staging of colorectal Carcinoma 
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
32 
Surgery  Ulcerative colitis  1 348 Explain the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, 
complications, and surgical management of Ulcerative colitis 
Crohn`s disease 1 349 Explain the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, 
complications, and surgical management of Crohn`s disease 
Diverticular disease 1 350 Explain the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, 
complications and management of Diverticulosis and 
Diverticulitis 
Anal diseases: 
• fistula  
• fissures  
• hemorrhoids  
1 351 Define perianal fistula and anal fissure 
352 Explain the risk factors and management of anal fistula and 
anal fissures 
353 Explain the risk factors and management of hemorrhoids  
Colorectal cancers 1 354 Classify colorectal cancers 
356 Describe the staging of colorectal cancers 
357 Explain the pathogenesis, risk factors and clinical features of 
colorectal cancers 
358 Explain the complications, management, and prognosis of 
colorectal cancers 
Ischemic Colitis 1 359 Explain the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, 
complications, and management of Ischemic colitis 
Medicine  Irritable bowel 
syndrome 
1 360 Explain the risk factors, clinical features, and management of 
irritable bowel syndrome 
Ulcerative colitis  1 361 Explain the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, 
complications, and surgical management of Crohn`s disease 
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
33 
Crohn`s disease 1 362 Explain the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, 
complications, and management of Crohn`s disease 
Ano-rectal infections  1 363 Classify anorectal infections. 
 364 Explain the risk factors, clinical features and management of 
anorectal infections including sexually transmitted infections 
Pharmacology  Drugs used in the 
treatment of irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS) 
1 365 Enlist the drugs used in IBS 
  366 Describe the mechanism of action of antispasmodics 
(anticholinergics), 5-HT receptor antagonisms (Alosetron) in 
IBS 
Drugs used in the 
treatment of IBD 
2 367 Classify the drugs used in IBD 
360 Describe the mechanism of actions of aminosalicylates, 
glucocorticoids, purine analogues, methotrexate, monoclonal 
antibodies, and anti-integrin in IBDs 
369 Explain the adverse effects of drugs used in the treatment of 
IBD  
Forensic 
medicine 
Abdominal injuries 1 370 Describe injuries to abdominal wall 
371 Describe injuries to esophagus, intestine, and stomach 
372 Describe injuries to liver and spleen. 
 
 
 
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
34 
Practical Work 
Pathology  Ascaris Lumbricoides 6 373 Identify the important morphological and staining 
characteristics of the ova 
Enterobius vermicularis 374 Identify the important morphological and staining 
characteristics of the ova 
Ankylostoma 
duodenale 
375 Identify the important morphological and staining 
characteristics of the ova 
Liver Function Tests 376 To interpret normal and abnormal liver function tests in 
different clinical scenarios 
Pharmacology  Peptic ulcer disease 5 377 construct prescription for Helicobacter-associated peptic ulcer 
disease (Triple therapy & Quadruple therapy) 
Anti-emetics 378 construct prescriptions for motion sickness, morning sickness, 
post-operative patient 
379 construct prescriptions for cancer chemotherapy-induced 
vomiting 
 380 construct a prescription for a patient suffering from amoebic 
dysentery  
Enteric fever  381 construct a prescription for a patient suffering from Enteric 
fever 
 382 Write a prescription for a patient suffering from Ascariasis  
Forensic 
medicine 
Poisons  5 383 Identify corrosives 
Corosives  384 Case presentation of vitriolage 
Irritants  385 identify common irritant poisons 
Metallic poisons  
386 
387 
identify common Metallic and non-metallic poisons 
Vegetable and animal 
poisons 
identify common Vegetable and animal poisons  
Community 
medicine 
Protein 
calorie 
1.5 
388 
Identify the model 
389 Differentiate between the clinical features of 2 models 
malnutrition  
My food plate/ The 
pyramid 
390 Justify its public health importance 
1.5 
391 Signify the concept of food fortification and food adulteration 
392 
Identify the model 
393 Describe different components of the model 
Health education 
1.5 
394 
identify a health education message on the problem/scenario 
provided 
House fly /arthropods  
395 
1.5 
396 
Formulate 
a health education message on the 
problem/scenario provided 
Identify the model 
397 Explain the disease caused by this vector and its control 
Aedes Egypti 
1.5 
398 
Identify the model 
399 Explain the disease caused by this vector and its control 
Autoclave  
1.5 
400 
Identify the model 
401 Explain the types of items for which autoclaves are used 
402 
Explain the steps of instruments sterilization 
35 
KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 KMU (IHPER)- Central Curriculum Committee  
 
36 
 
Learning Resources 
Table 4: Reference Textbooks 
S# Subjects Resources 
1. Anatomy A. Gross Anatomy  
1. K.L. Moore, Clinically Oriented Anatomy  
B. Embryology  
1. KeithL. Moore. The Developing Human  
2. Langman’s Medical Embryology 
2. Community Medicine 1. Community Medicine by Parikh 
2. Community Medicine by M Ilyas  
3. Basic Statistics for the Health Sciences by Jan W Kuzma 
3. OBGYN 1. Obstetrics by Ten Teachers, Louise C. Kenny, Jenny E. Myers  
2. Gynaecology by Ten Teachers, Louise Kenny, Helen Bickerstaff  
3. Hacker & Moore's Essentials of Obstetrics and Gynecology  
4. Textbook of Gynecology, Rashid Latif Khan  
5. Fundamentals of Gynaecology, Dr Arshad Chohan 
4. Pathology 1. Robbins & Cotran, Pathologic Basis of Disease,9 th edition.  
2. Rapid Review Pathology,4 th edition by Edward F. Goljan MD 
5. Physiology 1. Textbook Of Medical Physiology by Guyton And Hall 
 2. Ganong‘s Review of Medical Physiology  
3. Human Physiology by Lauralee Sherwood  
4. Berne & Levy Physiology  
5. Best & Taylor Physiological Basis of Medical Practice 
6. Paeds Basis of Pediatrics (8th Edition Pervez Akbar) 
 