1. Despite aggressive treatment strategies, her polyps recur and her chest infections also are getting worse. Her sweat chloride test was ordered and it was abnormal. The child is suffering from

2. A 43 years old male patient came through OPD with the history of nasal obstruction, headache, post nasal drip associated with decreased sense of smell lethargy and intermittent ear clogging. On examination of the nose there is white glistening soft tissue mass which are insensitive to touch. Which is the most suitable option of the following

3. A 60 years old male patient who is known case of uncontrolled diabetes and hypertension admitted in medical ward for fever, progressively increasing headache and has developed left periorbital edema for the last one day. On examination there is black crusting in his left nasal cavity and has restricted eye movements with decreased visual acuity. What is the most likely diagnosis?

4. A 50 years old male patient came through opd with the history of hard-of-hearing and foul smelling left ear discharge for the last 6-7 years. The patient developed headache and nausea for the last 7-10 days. The patient fails to take the names of common objects like cup and saucer but can demonstrate their use. What would be the possible cause of this condition;

5. A 31 years old male patient come to ENT clinic with the history of bilateral nasal obstruction for the last 10 months. associated with post nasal drips and hyposmia. Examination reveals bilateral nasal polyposis. CT nose and paranasal sinuses shows differential densities in maxillary sinuses and ethmoid sinuses. Peroperative caseous and jelly like materials found along with nasal polyps. What is the most probable diagnosis?

6. A 53 years old male healthy patient came through OPD with the history of nasal obstruction, headache associated with sneezing, watery eyes and post nasal drip. On examination he has periorbital edema and nasal polyposis. The nasal discharge has eosinophilia and Charcot -Leyden crystals. Which of the following describes best the aforementioned conditions;

7. A 34 years old female patient came through OPD with the history of nasal obstruction, mucopurulent nasal discharge associated with headache and facial pain worsens with straining and bending over. What do you think it would be

8. A 58 yr old lady having cataracts in both eyes presents to eye emergency department with the complaint of sudden onset of pain and gross dimness of vision in her right eye. On examination of the right eye the cornea is edematous, anterior chamber is shallow, pupil is mid-dilated, with dense cataract, intraocular pressure is 60mmHg. The lady is suffering from:

9. A 25 years old male patient came from Afghanistan with the history of hard-of-hearing and painless foul smelling ear discharge for the last 6-7 months. On otoscopy the tympanic membrane has multiple small perforations and pale granulations in the middle ear cavity. What do you expect of the following?